# Apio Developer Environment

This page explains how to set up the Apio development environment.
If you just want to quickly test the latest development version of Apio,
install Python and run the following command:

```
pip install --force-reinstall -U git+https://github.com/FPGAwars/apio.git@main
```

> For a specific commit, replace `main` with the commit's SHA.

The rest of the page describes the settings for the Apio development environment.

## Fork the Apio repository

The first step in developing for Apio is to fork the [Apio repository](https://github.com/FPGAwars/apio). This will allow you to run the GitHub test workflow before submitting your pull request. In the rest of this document, we assume that you have forked the Apio repository and cloned it locally on your computer.

## Install the 'Invoke' tool

Apio development tasks are defined in the file `tasks.py` which is executed by the `invoke` command. To install the `invoke` command run

```
pip install invoke
```

Test it by listing the available tasks

```
invoke --list
```

> HINT: You can use the shortcut `inv` instead of `invoke`.

## Install your cloned Apio

The easiest way to develop Apio is to install its source code from your local repo as the Pip `apio` package. This will allow you to test your edited code by running `apio` from the command line.

To install the Apio source code as the Pip `apio` package, run these command in the root directory of the Apio repository:

```
invoke install-apio
```

From this point on, when you run `apio`, it will run the source code in your cloned repo, including any changes you may have.

## Test your changes locally

Before creating a commit, test your code locally by running this in the repo root directory:

```shell
invoke test
invoke t   # Shortcut, same as above.
```

During debugging, it is sometimes useful to run quick partial tests before running `invoke check`. Here are some examples:

```shell
# Run linters only
invoke lint
invoke l   # Shortcut, same as above.

# Run a single test file with verbose info
pytest -vv -s test/managers/test_project.py

# Run a single test with verbose info
pytest -vv -s test/managers/test_project.py::test_first_env_is_default
```

## Clean the Apio project

The apio directory tree may contain temporary artifacts and caches that were
generated by the various command. Use this command to safely clearing them
and starting at a clean well define starting point.

```shell
# Clean project artifacts and caches.
invoke clean
invoke c    # Shortcut, same as above.
```

## Generate a test coverage report.

You can generate a report with the line by line coverage of the tests by running

```shell
invoke coverage-report
invoke cr   # Shortcut, same as above.
```

This will update the page `_pytest-coverage/index.html` with the latest coverage information.

> The directory `_pytest-coverage` is ignored by git and is not checked in with apio.

The test coverage is also published online at the [Test Coverage Report](https://fpgawars.github.io/apio/coverage) each time a new commit is checked in.

## Confirm that the test workflow passes

Once you are ready to send a pull request from your forked repository, make sure that the test workflow completed successfully. You can find it in the Actions tab of your forked repo.

> The test workflow tests the `main` branch, so if you worked on your own branch, merge it with `main` first.

## Using `APIO_DEBUG` to print verbose debug information

Debug information can be printed by defining the env var `APIO_DEBUG` with an
int value in the range 1 (minimal debug info) to 10 (verbose debug info).

```
# Linux and Mac OSX
export APIO_DEBUG=1   # Minimal debug info
export APIO_DEBUG=3   # More debug info

# Windows
set APIO_DEBUG=1
set APIO_DEBUG=3
```

## Debugging with Visual Studio Code

The file `.vscode/launch.json` contains debugging targets for the Visual Studio Code (VSC) debugger. To use them, make sure that you open the Apio project at its root directory and select the desired VSC debugging target. To customize the targets for your specific needs, click on the Settings icon (wheel) near the debugging target and edit its definition in `launch.json` (do not submit changes to `launch.json` unless they will benefit other developers).

Since Apio launches Scons as a subprocess, **debugging the Scons code requires a different approach** using these steps:

1. Set the environment variable `APIO_SCONS_DEBUGGER` to cause Scons to wait for the debugger (in `apio/scons/SConstruct`).
2. Set your desired breakpoints in the Scons part of Apio.
3. From the command line, run the Apio command that invokes the Scons subprocess (e.g., `apio build`).
4. In the VSC debugger, start the target `Attach remote debugger`.

## Apio remote config during testing

Apio retrieves its package information from a remote config `.jsonc` file whose URL is stored in `apio/resources/config.jsonc`. During automated testing it is overridden to point
to the local copy of the config file in case it was modified in the local repository.
```
